Contents
→Learning objectives
01Why version control
02Git vs GitHub
03Core terms
04Local & remote repos
05Install & configure
06git init
07Create a repo on GitHub
08git clone
09The basic cycle
10Status, diff & history
11Commit messages
12.gitignore
↳Practice sandbox
↳Command reference
↳Common errors
↳Hands-on exercise
↳Knowledge check
↳Key takeaways
Git & GitHub · Module 1
Git Foundations and Version Control
Goal: understand why Git exists and how a change moves from the file you are editing, into your local history, and out to a shared repository on GitHub.

START HERE
Learning objectives
Work through this module and you will be able to do each of the following without looking anything up. Come back to this list at the end and tick off what you can now do.

Explain why version control exists and what problems it solves for a team working on the same files.
Tell Git and GitHub apart: what each one does and which runs where.
Use the core vocabulary: repository, working directory, staging area, commit, branch and remote.
Install and configure Git with your name, email and a default branch.
Start a repository locally with git init, or on GitHub through the website.
Connect a local repository to GitHub with git remote add and send your first commits with git push.
Copy an existing repository to your computer with git clone, using HTTPS or SSH.
Run the everyday cycle: edit, inspect, stage exactly what you mean, and commit.
Read your history with git status, git diff, git log and git show.
Write commit messages a teammate understands six months later.
Keep secrets and generated files out of Git with .gitignore, and know its limits.
How to use this module
Read each lesson, run the commands in a real terminal as you go, and use the practice sandbox whenever you want to try something without risk. Finish with the hands-on exercise and the knowledge check.

LESSON 01
Why teams need version control
Imagine three developers working on the same application. Each has a copy of login.ts. One fixes a validation bug, another changes the design, and the third adds an error message. If they swap files by email or a shared folder, someone will eventually overwrite someone else’s work, and nobody will know which copy is correct.

Version control solves this by recording every change over time. It lets a team:

See who changed what, and when. Every change carries an author, a date and a reason.
Work on one project together instead of passing around folders named final, final-v2 and final-latest.
Review changes before sharing them.
Recover an earlier version when a change causes a problem.
Combine work from several developers safely.
Without version control
codeengine/
codeengine-new/
codeengine-final/
codeengine-final-fixed/
With Git: one project, a history of commits
· Add login form
· Validate email address
· Show error for invalid credentials
· Fix login button on mobile
Key idea
A version control system is more than a backup. A backup keeps copies; version control keeps a meaningful history: each step is labelled with what changed and why, and you can move between steps.

LESSON 02
Git versus GitHub
Git is the version control tool. It runs on your computer and tracks the history of a repository. You can use Git with no internet connection and no GitHub account.

GitHub is a service that hosts Git repositories online and adds collaboration features: pull requests, issue tracking, code review and access control.

Name	What it is	Runs where
Git	Tracks changes and manages repository history	Your computer
GitHub	Hosts Git repositories and supports team collaboration	Online service
GitLab	Another platform for hosting and collaborating on Git repositories	Online or self-hosted
Bitbucket	Another Git hosting and collaboration platform	Online service
Remember it this way
Git creates and manages the history. GitHub gives you a place to share that history. Git is the camera; GitHub is the shared photo album.

LESSON 03
Core Git terms
Git keeps your work in three local areas. Each has its own colour on this page so you can follow a change as it moves.

Working directory
The files you see and edit
git add
Staging area
Changes picked for the next commit
git commit
Local repository
Saved snapshots (commits) in .git
git push
Remote
Shared copy on GitHub. First push in Lesson 07.
Repository
A repository (“repo”) is a project that Git tracks: the project files plus Git’s history of recorded changes.

Running git init creates a hidden .git directory inside the project. That folder is the history. Don’t edit it by hand, and don’t delete it unless you mean to throw the history away.

Working directory
The project folder and the files you currently see and edit. Every change starts here.

Staging area
Holds the changes you have chosen for the next commit. Staging lets you decide which changes belong together.

Example: you edited both login.ts and README.md, but only login.ts is part of the login bug fix. Stage just that file, commit it, and commit the README separately.

Commit
A recorded snapshot of the staged changes. Each commit has a unique ID, an author, a date and a message describing the change.

A commit is created in your local repository. It is not uploaded to GitHub until you push it.

Branch
A line of development. Teams create a branch to work on a feature or fix while the main line stays available for other work. You’ll practise branches in a later module.

Remote
A named connection to another copy of the repository, usually hosted online. When you clone, Git names that connection origin by default.

Your local repository and the remote can hold different commits until you synchronise them.

LESSON 04
Local, remote, public and private repositories
A local repository lives on your computer. You edit files, stage changes and create commits there, entirely offline.

A remote repository is another copy, commonly hosted on GitHub, GitLab or Bitbucket. Teams use it to share and coordinate work.

Visibility	Who can see it
Public	Generally anyone can view the repository and its full history
Private	Only people who have been granted access
Private is not the same as safe
Everyone with access to a private repository can read every committed file and its whole history. Never commit passwords, API keys, access tokens or private keys, in public or private repositories.

How a change travels
Edit a file → Stage the change → Commit locally → Push to a remote

Lessons 06 to 12 cover this whole path: the first three steps in depth, and the first push to GitHub in Lesson 07. Pulling other people’s changes and resolving conflicts are covered in the collaboration module.

LESSON 05
Install and configure Git
Install Git with your operating system’s installer or package manager (the official downloads are at git-scm.com/downloads). Then open a terminal and confirm it works:

terminal
Copy
git --version
git version 2.x.x          # any recent version is fine
Tell Git who you are
Git writes your name and email into every commit as the author. Set them once before your first commit:

terminal
Copy
git config --global user.name "Ramesh Kumar"
git config --global user.email "ramesh@example.com"
Check the values:

terminal
Copy
git config --global user.name
Ramesh Kumar
git config --global user.email
ramesh@example.com
--global applies the setting to every repository under your user account. If one project needs a different identity (a work email, say), run the same commands inside that repository without --global:

inside the work project
Copy
git config user.name "Ramesh Kumar"
git config user.email "ramesh@company.example"
The repository-level setting wins for that repository. Everywhere else, the global setting applies.

Optional: name the first branch main
Older Git versions name the first branch master; most teams now use main. Set a default once (Git 2.28 or newer):

terminal
Copy
git config --global init.defaultBranch main
Common misunderstanding
The commit email is only author information written into commits. Setting it does not sign you in to GitHub or give you access to any repository. Access is handled separately, through your GitHub account and credentials.

LESSON 06
Create a repository with git init
Use git init when you already have a project folder, or are starting a new one, and want Git to begin tracking it.

terminal
Copy
mkdir git-practice
cd git-practice
git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /home/ramesh/git-practice/.git/
Check the status:

terminal
Copy
git status
On branch main

No commits yet

nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
The repository exists, but it has no commits yet. Now create a file and check again:

terminal
Copy
echo "# Git Practice" > README.md
git status
On branch main

No commits yet

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	README.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
README.md is untracked: it exists in the working directory, but Git has never recorded it in a commit.

Watch out
Run git init in the project folder, not in your home directory. If you accidentally turn your whole home folder into a repository, git status will list hundreds of unrelated files.

LESSON 07
Create a repository on GitHub
A local repository lives only on your computer. To share it, back it up, or collaborate, you create a matching repository on GitHub and connect the two.

Step 1 · Create the repository on the website
Sign in to github.com. Click the + button in the top-right corner and choose New repository.

Give it a name, for example git-practice. Keep it short, lowercase, with hyphens instead of spaces. It does not have to match your local folder name, but matching it avoids confusion.

Add a one-line description (optional but helpful).

Choose the visibility: Public for anyone to see, Private for people you invite. You can change this later in the repository settings.

Decide whether to initialize the repository with a README, a .gitignore template and a licence.

If you will clone it fresh (Path B below), ticking Add a README file is convenient: the repo starts with one commit.
If you will connect an existing local repository (Path A below), leave every box unticked. An empty remote is much easier to push to.
Click Create repository. GitHub shows a setup page with your repository’s URL and the exact commands for both paths below. Copy the URL from there.

Step 2 · Choose your path
You have…	Path	Commands
A project folder on your computer that is already a Git repository (from git init) and an empty GitHub repo	A · Connect and push	git remote add then git push
A GitHub repo (yours or someone else’s) and nothing on your computer yet	B · Clone	git clone (next lesson)
Path A · Connect an existing local repository and push
Inside the folder you created with git init in Lesson 06, tell Git where the GitHub copy lives. The connection is named origin by convention:

inside git-practice/
Copy
git remote add origin https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/git-practice.git
git remote -v
origin  https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/git-practice.git (fetch)
origin  https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/git-practice.git (push)
Make sure your branch is called main (older Git versions default to master), then push your commits up for the first time:

inside git-practice/
Copy
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
Enumerating objects: 3, done.
...
To https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/git-practice.git
 * [new branch]      main -> main
branch 'main' set up to track 'origin/main'.
The -u flag links your local main to origin/main, so from now on a plain git push is enough. Refresh the GitHub page: your README.md and commit history are there.

Why the remote should be empty
If you ticked “Add a README” on GitHub and have commits locally, the two histories start from different first commits and the push is rejected. For now, create the remote empty. Merging unrelated histories is covered in the collaboration module.

Signing in from the terminal
The first time you push over HTTPS, Git asks you to authenticate. GitHub no longer accepts your account password here. Use one of these instead:

Git Credential Manager (installed with Git for Windows, available for macOS and Linux) opens a browser window; sign in once and it remembers you.
GitHub CLI: install gh, run gh auth login, and follow the prompts.
A personal access token created under Settings → Developer settings → Personal access tokens, pasted in place of the password. Treat it like a password and never commit it.
SSH keys: generate a key with ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "you@example.com", add the public key under Settings → SSH and GPG keys, then use the SSH form of the URL (git@github.com:USER/REPO.git). No prompts after setup.
Check it worked
On GitHub, open the repository and click the commit count (for example 2 commits). You should see the same messages as git log --oneline on your computer.

LESSON 08
Copy a repository with git clone
Use git clone when a repository already exists on GitHub (yours, a teammate’s, or an open-source project) and you want your own local copy. This is Path B from the previous lesson.

Find the clone URL
On the repository’s GitHub page, click the green Code button. You will see two forms of the same address:

Form	Looks like	When to use it
HTTPS	https://github.com/USER/REPO.git	Simplest to start with; asks you to sign in (token or credential manager) when you push
SSH	git@github.com:USER/REPO.git	Once you have added an SSH key to GitHub; no sign-in prompts afterwards
Cloning a public repository needs no sign-in at all. Pushing to it does, and only if you have been granted access.

Clone it
terminal
Copy
git clone https://github.com/example/project.git
Cloning into 'project'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 42, done.
Receiving objects: 100% (42/42), done.
Git creates a project folder, downloads the full history, checks out the default branch, and sets up a remote named origin pointing back to the URL. Move into the folder before running any project commands:

terminal
Copy
cd project
git status
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
git remote -v        # shows where origin points
git log --oneline    # the history came with the clone
To clone into a folder with a different name, add it after the URL:

terminal
Copy
git clone https://github.com/example/project.git my-copy
Which starting command?
Your situation	Use
Starting to track a folder that isn’t a repository yet	git init, then connect it with git remote add
Getting a local copy of a repository that already exists on GitHub	git clone URL
Don’t combine them
A cloned folder is already a repository with origin configured. Running git init or git remote add origin inside it is unnecessary and the second will fail with “remote origin already exists”.

Clone, or fork and clone?
If you don’t have write access to someone else’s repository, GitHub’s Fork button makes your own copy under your account first. You then clone your fork. Forks and pull requests are covered in the collaboration module.

LESSON 09
The basic cycle: edit → inspect → stage → commit
This is the loop you will run dozens of times a day. Learn it until it’s automatic.

1 · Edit
Change or create a file in the working directory.

2 · Inspect
See which files changed, then see the exact lines that changed in tracked files:

terminal
Copy
git status
git diff
3 · Stage
Move the change into the staging area, then confirm what’s selected:

terminal
Copy
git add README.md
git status
git diff --staged     # exactly what the next commit will contain
4 · Commit
Record the staged changes as a snapshot in the local repository:

terminal
Copy
git commit -m "Add project introduction"
[main (root-commit) 3f2a9c1] Add project introduction
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
 create mode 100644 README.md
git status
On branch main
nothing to commit, working tree clean
git log
The seven-character code (3f2a9c1 above) is the start of the commit ID. Yours will be different.

What if you edit a file again after staging it?
Staging takes a snapshot of the file at the moment you run git add. Later edits stay in the working directory until you add them too. git status will list the same file twice, once under “Changes to be committed” and once under “Changes not staged for commit”.

terminal
Copy
git diff              # the newer, unstaged edits
git add README.md     # stage them as well
git diff --staged     # confirm the full set
This is why you always inspect staged changes before committing. You can try it in the practice sandbox below.

Changed your mind about something you staged?
terminal
Copy
git restore --staged README.md   # unstage; your edits stay in the file
Careful with git add .
git add . stages every change in the current folder, including files you forgot about. It’s convenient, but while learning, add files by name and check git status first.

LESSON 10
Read status, differences and history
git status: where are my changes?
State	Meaning	Area
Untracked	A new file Git has never recorded	working
Modified	A tracked file has changed since the last commit	working
Staged	A change selected for the next commit	staging
Clean working tree	Nothing is waiting to be committed	committed
git diff: what changed that I haven’t staged?
Shows unstaged changes to tracked files. Lines starting with + were added; lines starting with - were removed.

terminal
Copy
git diff
diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
--- a/README.md
+++ b/README.md
@@ -1 +1,3 @@
 # Git Practice
+
+A small repository for learning Git basics.
Why is my new file missing?
git diff does not show the contents of untracked files. Git has nothing to compare them against yet. Stage the file, then use git diff --staged.

git diff --staged: what will the next commit contain?
Run this before every commit to catch accidental edits, debug code or secrets.

git log: what commits exist?
example output
Copy
git log --oneline
b71e04d Document local setup steps
5c9d2aa Add notes on Git versus GitHub
3f2a9c1 Add project introduction
Newest commits appear first. Plain git log shows the full ID, author and date for each. Press q to leave the log view.

git show: what happened in one commit?
terminal
Copy
git show              # the latest commit
git show 5c9d2aa      # a specific commit, by ID from git log
A commit ID is a unique identifier. Git accepts a short, unambiguous prefix of it, which is why seven characters are usually enough.

LESSON 11
Write clear commit messages
A good message says what the change accomplishes, so a teammate scanning git log six months from now understands it without opening the code. Keep each commit to one logical piece of work where practical.

Vague	Clear
changes	Add email validation to signup form
fix	Fix login error message on invalid password
update files	Document local setup steps
A simple pattern
Start with a verb in the command form: Add, Fix, Remove, Document. Read it as “This commit will… add setup instructions”.
Aim for about 50 characters in the first line.
Describe the result, not the process (“Fix mobile login button”, not “Tried some CSS”).
terminal
Copy
git commit -m "Add setup instructions to README"
Before every commit, ask
Do these staged changes belong together?
Does the message describe the result?
Did I accidentally stage a generated file or a secret?
LESSON 12
Use .gitignore
A .gitignore file lists paths Git should ignore while they are untracked. It keeps generated files, local settings and sensitive files out of new commits. Create it in the repository root and commit it, so the whole team shares the same rules.

For a typical JavaScript or TypeScript project:

.gitignore
Copy
node_modules/
dist/
coverage/
.env
.env.*
!.env.example
Entry	Why it’s ignored
node_modules/	Installed dependencies; anyone can restore them from the project’s package files
dist/	Generated build output
coverage/	Generated test coverage reports
.env, .env.*	Local environment files that may hold secrets
!.env.example	The ! makes an exception so a safe example file is tracked
The example file documents which settings are needed, with placeholder values only:

.env.example
Copy
API_URL=https://example.test
API_KEY=replace-with-your-own-key
To check whether, and why, a path is ignored:

terminal
Copy
git check-ignore -v .env
.gitignore:4:.env	.env
Two important limits
1. It doesn’t affect files Git already tracks. If a file was committed before you added it to .gitignore, Git keeps tracking it. To stop tracking it while keeping your local copy, run git rm --cached FILE and commit.

2. It doesn’t erase history. A secret that was ever committed stays in earlier commits. Treat it as exposed: revoke or replace the credential right away.

.gitignore is a helpful safety net, not a substitute for reviewing git diff --staged before each commit.

PRACTICE
Practice sandbox
Try the cycle here before you use a real terminal. Edit files, stage them, commit, and watch how git status changes. Try editing a file after staging it, and try adding .env.

git-practice/
Simulated in your browser. Nothing runs on your computer.
README.md
Edit
git add
committed · unchanged
login.ts
Edit
git add
committed · unchanged
notes.md
Edit
git add
untracked
.env
Edit
git add
ignored by .gitignore
terminal · on branch main
Reset
git status
On branch main
Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	notes.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
git status
git diff --staged
git log --oneline
Message
Add project introduction
git commit
REFERENCE
Command reference
Command	What it does
git --version	Checks the installed Git version
git config	Reads or changes Git settings (name, email, default branch)
git init	Creates a repository in the current folder
git clone URL	Copies an existing repository to your computer and sets up origin
git remote add origin URL	Connects a local repository to a GitHub repository
git remote -v	Lists the remotes and their URLs
git branch -M main	Renames the current branch to main
git push -u origin main	Sends local commits to GitHub and links the branches for future pushes
git status	Shows the state of the working directory and staging area
git add FILE	Stages a file’s current changes
git restore --staged FILE	Unstages a file, keeping your edits
git diff	Shows unstaged changes to tracked files
git diff --staged	Shows staged changes: the next commit
git commit -m "MESSAGE"	Records staged changes as a commit
git log / --oneline	Shows commit history, full or compact
git show [ID]	Shows the details and changes of one commit
git check-ignore -v FILE	Explains which rule ignores a file
git rm --cached FILE	Stops tracking a file but keeps it on disk
TROUBLESHOOTING
Common errors and how to fix them
Every beginner hits these. Read the message Git prints; it usually tells you the fix.

Git says	What it means	Fix
fatal: not a git repository	You are in a folder that is not inside a repository	cd into the project folder, or run git init if it isn’t one yet
Author identity unknown / Please tell me who you are	Name and email are not configured	Run the two git config --global user.name / user.email commands from Lesson 05
An editor opens after git commit	You forgot -m, so Git wants you to type the message in an editor (often Vim)	Type your message, then press Esc, type :wq, Enter. Or quit without committing: Esc, :q!, Enter. Next time use -m "message"
nothing to commit, working tree clean	There are no changes, or you didn’t stage them	Run git status; if files show as modified or untracked, git add them first
nothing added to commit but untracked files present	New files exist but were never added	git add FILE, then commit
Changes not staged for commit after you already added the file	You edited the file again after staging it	git add FILE again to include the newer edits (Lesson 09)
error: remote origin already exists	The repository already has a remote called origin (typical after cloning)	Check git remote -v. To change it: git remote set-url origin NEW-URL
! [rejected] main -> main (fetch first)	The GitHub copy has commits you don’t have locally (for example a README created on the website)	Run git pull origin main --allow-unrelated-histories, resolve anything it asks, then push again. Next time create the remote empty
src refspec main does not match any	You pushed before making any commit, or your branch is named master	Make a commit first; run git branch -M main if the branch has the old name
Support for password authentication was removed	You typed your GitHub password at the HTTPS prompt	Use a personal access token, Git Credential Manager, gh auth login, or SSH (Lesson 07)
Permission denied (publickey)	SSH URL, but GitHub doesn’t know your key	Add your public key under Settings → SSH and GPG keys, or switch to the HTTPS URL
A file is in .gitignore but still shows in git status	It was committed before the ignore rule existed	git rm --cached FILE, then commit (Lesson 12)
HANDS-ON
Hands-on exercise
Create a small repository with two meaningful commits. Tick each step as you finish it.


1
Create a git-foundations folder and run git init inside it.

2
Add a README.md describing the project.

3
Inspect it with git status, then stage and commit it.

4
Add a notes.md file explaining Git versus GitHub in your own words.

5
Inspect the change, stage it, review it with git diff --staged, and commit it.

6
Run git log --oneline and git show to review your work.

7
Add a .gitignore containing .env, create a local .env file, and confirm git status doesn’t list it as untracked.

8
On GitHub, create an empty repository named git-foundations (no README, no .gitignore).

9
Connect it with git remote add origin URL, then run git branch -M main and git push -u origin main.

10
Open the repository on GitHub and confirm the commit list matches git log --oneline. Then, in a different folder, git clone it and check the history came with it.
0 of 10 steps done

Expected outcome
Your history has two or more commits with clear messages, .gitignore is committed, your local .env file appears in neither the staged nor the committed changes, and the same commits are visible on GitHub and in a fresh clone.

SELF-CHECK
Quick knowledge check
Answer in your head first, then reveal.

1
Does git commit upload a change to GitHub?
Reveal
2
What does staging do?
Reveal
3
Which command shows the changes selected for the next commit?
Reveal
4
When should you use git clone instead of git init?
Reveal
5
Will adding .env to .gitignore erase a secret that was already committed?
Reveal
6
You staged login.ts, then edited it again. What will git commit record?
Reveal
7
Does setting user.email give you access to a GitHub repository?
Reveal
8
You ran git init locally and made commits. How do you get them onto a new, empty GitHub repository?
Reveal
9
What does the -u in git push -u origin main do?
Reveal
10
What is the difference between the HTTPS and SSH clone URLs?
Reveal
SUMMARY
Key takeaways
Git is local; GitHub is remote.
Git tracks history on your computer. GitHub hosts a copy so a team can share it. Commits never leave your machine until you push.

Three areas, three colours.
working directory is what you edit, staging area is what you have chosen, repository is what you have recorded.

Inspect before you stage; inspect before you commit.
git status and git diff before git add; git diff --staged before git commit.

One commit, one idea, one clear message.
Start with a verb, describe the result, keep it around 50 characters.

Two ways to start.
git init for a folder you already have, then git remote add and git push -u origin main. git clone for a repository that already exists on GitHub.

.gitignore prevents, it doesn’t undo.
It stops untracked files being added. It cannot untrack a file or erase a secret from history. A committed secret is a leaked secret.

Next module: collaborating through a shared repository with branches, git pull, git fetch, forks and pull requests.